Mexico decriminalize a lot of drugs,
like fairly recently that a big supreme court decision aspect a lot of time in
Mexico.
And I,
you know,
I think about,
I think about this time I spent in Mexico really often it because it was,
I'm going to cover it.
I,
you know,
been to a lot of bad places.
I covered the war in the Congo.
I've been to Iraq,
I've been to Gaza.
I've never seen anything like what happened to horrors when,
when I was there,
the,
you know,
I think it's worth explaining.
So when you
luck,
I was saying when you ban drugs then it disappear,
right?
The transplant to armed criminal gangs.
If you live in a housing project in the United States where 5% of the economy of
that housing project is in the hands of armed criminal gangs,
that's going to be a shitty,
frightening place to be.
Right?
Place like C.
Dot.
Juarez,
which is on the border with board,
Mexican side of the United States border with them.
It's the other side with our Paso.
Um,
by the time I went there,
it was 70%,
seven 0% of the economy was in the hands of these armed criminal gangs.
Right.
So I remember
going to see this guy,
Ross Saleo Retta,
uh,
interview people about him and horrors.
But then I went to,
he's in prison in the United States is in Tyler County and Rosalia it's
interesting guys.
He butchered or beheaded about 70 people between the ages of 13 and 17.
Um,
I'm going into the prison actually to see him and the guard said to me on the
way in,
but obviously I can't leave you alone with him cause he's like a shit.
All these people.
I was like,
oh great,
thanks.
And we have about five minutes until around the guard was fucking God.
But I'm saying we've Rozalia talking about his life and his,
his,
his story.
So Rozalia grew up in Laredo,
Texas side of the border.
It's basically the same places,
Nuevo Laredo on the,
on the Mexican side.
It was very easy to cross the border at that time.
Secret he was growing up in the,
the late nineties.
Noughties remember Sally?
I was 13.
So loads get the Zetas were kind of famous drug gang at that time.
They still are a good drug cartel.
How does eight hours were created?
It's an insane story.
Every tax payer should know.
The US government decided to train and elite anti drug force for the,
for the Mexican government,
right?
Like kind of navy seals for the anti-drug force or they take them to Fort Bragg.
They spent something like $250 million training them up,
they go back to Mexico.
Six months later they all defected on mass.
Almost all of them are created a drug cartel.
There's eight is great.
You see your tax money.
Um,
so the Zetas were this kind of a glamorous,
in inverted commas,
drug gang operating on that part of the border.
Drug routes move around according to where they put policing.
It always gets through,
but it moves,
right?
They call it the balloon effect.
Imagine a balloon half full of air.
You pushed down one pace,
the air comes up somewhere else.
But at that time it was going through a Juarez and El Paso and Laredo,
Nuevo Laredo.
And Rosario.
So there's two stories about how Asalia gets involved with the Zetas.
What Russell Leo says is he was basically kidnapped by them and forced to start
killing people.
I don't think that's true.
If you look at the evidence,
it's the,
he sort of volunteered,
but he's 13,
so I don't hold him morally responsible for that.
But either way,
there's one night it all begins.
He's taken on the Mexican side of the border to a warehouse where they are
torturing people,
burning them alive.
He's given a gun by guy called Miguel Trevino,
who later became the head of the Zetas and he's told to shoot someone in the
head.
And that's the moment you're in.
And when you're in with the Zetas,
you'd never get out right there.
No one leaves.
Um,
no one leaves alive.
Uh,
and so they begin to train him.
He sent to us in 2005 he sent to a summer camp that's literally account for the
teachers.
You have to behead people and do all sorts of things.
And he's then sent him and his friends are then sent to
murder people is with friends,
Jessie and Gabriel,
they murder huge numbers that they were called within the Zetas called these
child soldiers the expendables,
cause they don't give a shit if they live or die.
Right.
The,
there's one person said to me,
they prefer children because they don't understand death so well.
Right.
Obviously it's for solid.
Got a bit older.
He understood death better.
All his friends get murdered,
eventually tries to get back to the US.
He cooperates.
He now lives in solitary confinement where he will live,
but the rest of his life,
because when they let him out of solitary,
shortly before I met him,
he was immediately stabbed in the neck.
Um,
and again,
you think about this insane violence that we created,
right when I went to Hawaii,
it's this bizarre thing.
So that time it wasn't,
you were told it wasn't quite rightly,
it wasn't safe to stay in horror as overnight.
So I would stay overnight in El Paso and I'd walk across the bridge right
through,
through your shift passport.
I remember the customs people going,
what the fuck are you going into?
Juarez.
But go,
go in there.
It's weird.
On on the other side of the bridge,
there's this sign and it says welcome to historic downtown Juarez.
And it used to be a tourist site.
Billie holiday got married there.
But um,
now it's just that time it was just covered with images of missing women,
just everywhere.
Because this is another really important part of what this violence doesn't
think.
It's really important.
We understand this is the violence caused by the system that we uphold and we
imposed on Mexico.
Mexicans do not want this.
Right?
So there's another story.
I think of all the stories I wrote about for chasing the scream along with one
other one I can tell you about if you want.
This was the hardest.
So woman in horrors.
Um,
when the drug war violence starts to go through called Maricella Escobedo,
she was a,
a nurse,
but Marissa was incredibly hardworking.
So she also would do these,
um,
I would just call them like woodcarvings basically.
And she would sell them in the market on Saturdays and Sundays.
She had three kids.
My youngest daughter was called Ruby.
She was 14 at the time and they would work on this stall in the marketplace
every Saturday,
I think maybe on Sundays as well,
some Sundays.
And one day a guy comes up to Mary Seller store called Sergio.
He was a young guy who was like 21.
Um,
and he's like,
you just had a baby.
He needs a job.
Marcella was kind of soft hearted.
She gives him a job working on her market though.
And a few months later she discovers tower horror that he's having sex with a 14
year old daughter Ruby.
And she's like,
fires him immediately and goes to the police and says,
you need to go and question him.
Right.
And He's 21,
she's 14.
This is a crime.
Police don't do anything.
She doesn't understand it.
What,
why are they not investigating this?
Her daughter starts running away to be with,
with Sergio.
Um,
Maricella keeps going to get her back.
She keeps going to the police saying this is a crime.
He can't live with a 14 year old go and arrest and they will do anything rash.
She completely puzzled by this.
Then Ruby gets pregnant.
Marcel is like fishes 15 by then it's like fuck,
I got to keep her in my life so she,
she keeps going to see ruby.
By this time she was kind of accepted the police on with real rage that police
aren't going to do an it thing and one day just after the baby was born,
she goes to see Ruby and Sergio's there with the baby and he says,
I'm a ruby has run away with another man.
She's gone.
She's not coming back.
Marisol is like,
what?
I left her baby.
No,
she hasn't done it.
I know she hasn't done that.
I know my daughter.
He's like,
well she's gone.
So Marisol awaits.
Christmas comes,
no message.
New Year comes,
She starts to go to the neighborhood and hand out leaflets with pictures of our
daughter.
Loads of women are going missing in Horace at this time or Taiwan minute.
I'm just saying,
have you seen this go?
And after a few days she gets a call from a kid called an hell who says,
I'm really frightened to tell you something.
If you drive me out into the desert,
I'll tell you.
So she drives an hell out into the desert.
I think he was 14.
Um,
and he says,
um,
Sergio murdered your daughter.
And he made me help him dispose of the body.
And he told Maricella where the body was.
It was actually a place where they dumped a pig carcasses from the AB 12.
She goes and she finds the body with,
with a son,
and she goes to the police and the police finally do something and they arrest
Sergio.
Sergio's put on trial in the witness box.
He breaks down,
admits he did it and apologizes to Maricella.
And then a few weeks later he's acquitted of all charges and disappears.
And Marisol is like,
what the fuck is going on here?
So she starts to look into this and she discovers,
and this is the work intersects with the drug war and really important way that
the Sergio was a member of the Zetas.
Right?
Now,
if you remember the Zetas at that time in horror as his different acts and other
drug gangs displaced them,
you own the state,
right?
And you have,
if they control 70% of the economy,
you have more money than the government,
right?
So the police worked for them.
When I went to go into be Rozalia,
he said,
when I would go murder people,
the police would,
would come with me.
They would dispose of the body,
right?
And number three is great.
And what year are we talking about?
This is like six years ago.
I remember the,
the,
the tea.
I'm a,
but it's actually because one of the things,
when you're in a dangerous place,
when you're,
one of the things you do is you read danger from how frightened the people
around you are,
right?
Because you don't know the place I was.
I mean,
I was there with Julio and Cardona who is my fixer,
who's an amazing,
he's the Reuters corresponding wires,
one of the bravest people I've ever met.
But it was realizing how frightened other people were for me and Leanne,
right?
And I remember after being there for few days,
helion kept introducing mean by that time,
the killings were basically all being done by the police.
And it was saying,
you know who Leon,
this is,
this is important that I meet people who've been killed by the police,
but I should also meet people who have been killed by the cartels,
more recent knee.
And he said that he just laughed and said,
no,
that's,
that's not how it works here I had now,
if the cartels want to kill someone,
they just pay the police to do it,
right?
So it's this real realization,
all right,
someone comes to you,
there is nowhere for you to go,
right?
So Mary Seller refuses to accept that she lives in a country where there is no
justice.
She decides,
okay,
they're not going to solve this.
I'm going to solve this.
She appealed low loads of women are missing because it turns out if a bunch of
criminals control the state,
they will just Myrdal.
Those are women and get away with it,
right?
There are some men who just want to murder women and if they give them license
to do it,
they'll do it.
That's why so many women we're missing.
Maricela gathers a load of those mothers.
She says some of them don't know where their daughters are.
Some of them know their daughters are dead.
She's like,
I need your help.
We're going to find this guy who's done this right?
So Mary Seller Tans herself with these women into a detective.
She starts tracking Sergio all over Mexico,
wherever there are sightings,
she walks everywhere.
She walks over a thousand miles,
right?
She walks through the desert.
It becomes a media phenomenon.
People follow her.
She's like this,
this symbol of the loss that's happened in Mexico and incredibly with the Front
Berta,
Alysia Garcia,
who I got to know later,
after two years,
she finds Sergio.
She tracks him down.
She goes to the police,
she tells them where he is,
they tip him off and he disappears.
I,
she's devastated.
So she decided she's going to go to the governor's mansion in Chihuahua.
Uh,
it's the state capitol.
She goes there and she sets up 10 outside the governor's mansion,
and she's like,
I'm not leaving here until you people go and find this man.
And she calls on every mother who has a daughter who's missing or who they're
afraid of four to come and join her in this fight.
Right?
And it gets to Christmas Eve and she's preparing to it just before Christmas.
Isn't Christmas Eve.
I'm going to have this big Christmas dinner here.
People can join me.
She gives this great speech and a man walks up,
turned ships are in the head,
in front of all the police.
Everyone.